Rework deprovisioning docs to add do-not-evict (#1147)
aws/karpenter: website/content/en/docs/tasks/deprov-nodes.md

---

> title: "Deprovisioning nodes"

Reviewer: I think you might need a rebase.

Author: Yeah. I know there have been some changes to this file. I'll do that.

linkTitle: "Deprovisioning"
weight: 10
---

Karpenter sets a Kubernetes [finalizer](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/finalizers/) on each node it provisions.

> The finalizer specifies additional actions the Karpenter controller will takes in response to a node deletion request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The finalizer specifies additional actions the Karpenter controller will take in response to a node deletion request.
```

Author: Done.

These include:

> * Marking the node as unschedulable, so no further pods can be deployed there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Marking the node as unschedulable, so no further pods can be scheduled there.
```

Author: Good catch! Done.

> * Evicting all workload pods from the node, draining it of all pods other than daemonsets.

Reviewer 2: WDYT about the following?

```suggestion
* Evicting all pods other than daemonsets from the node.
```

Author: Done.

* Deleting the node from the Kubernetes cluster.
* Terminating the instance from the cloud provider.

## How Karpenter nodes are deprovisioned

There are both automated and manual ways of deprovisioning nodes provisioned by Karpenter:

> * **Node empty**: Karpenter notes when the last workload (non-daemonset) pod stops running on a node. From that point, Karpenter waits the number of seconds set by `ttlSecondsAfterEmpty`  in the provisioner, then Karpenter requests to delete the node. This feature can keep costs down by removing nodes that are no longer being used for workloads.

Reviewer 2: nit: an extra space
```suggestion
* **Node empty**: Karpenter notes when the last workload (non-daemonset) pod stops running on a node. From that point, Karpenter waits the number of seconds set by `ttlSecondsAfterEmpty` in the provisioner, then Karpenter requests to delete the node. This feature can keep costs down by removing nodes that are no longer being used for workloads.
```

Author: Done.

> * **Node expired**: Karpenter asks to delete the node after a set number of seconds, based on the provisioner `ttlSecondsUntilExpired`  value, from the time the node was provisioned. One use case for node expiry is to handle node upgrades. Old nodes (with a potentially outdated Kubernetes version or operating system) are deleted, and replaced with nodes on the current version.

Reviewer 2: We should keep the verbiage the same as used above. 
```suggestion
* **Node expired**: Karpenter requests to delete the node after a set number of seconds, based on the provisioner `ttlSecondsUntilExpired` value, from the time the node was provisioned. One use case for node expiry is to handle node upgrades. Old nodes (with a potentially outdated Kubernetes version or operating system) are deleted, and replaced with nodes on the current version.
```

Reviewer 2: > and replaced with nodes on the current version.

This assumes that the user has configured their resources to use the latest version rather than a specific version. This may be too in the weeds, but I think it's good to note that this feature doesn't automatically version nodes.

    {{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

>     Keep in mind that a small NodeExpiry results in a higher churn in cluster activity. So, for example, if a cluster brings up all nodes at once, all the pods on those nodes would fall into the same batching window on expiration.

Reviewer 3: good tip

    {{% /alert %}}
    

> * **Node deleted**: You could use `kubectl` to remove a single Karpenter node:

Reviewer 3: we introduce "automated and manual ways of deprovisioing nodes" at the start, can we insert the word "manual" here to tie back to that?

Author: Good thought. Done.

    ```bash
    kubectl delete <nodename>
    ```

    Or delete all Karpenter nodes at once:

    ```bash
    kubectl delete -l <provisioner label>
 
    ```

> Whether through node expiry or manual deletion, Karpenter seeks to follow graceful termination procedures as described in Kubernetes [Graceful node shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/nodes/#graceful-node-shutdow) documentation.

Reviewer 3: Do we want to add something about how if the karpenter controller is removed (or fails), the finalizers on the nodes will be orphaned, and will need manual removal?

Author: Done.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
By adding the finalizer, Karpenter improves the default Kubernetes process of node deletion.
When you run `kubectl delete node` on a node without a finalizer, the node gets deleted in the API server but the instance keeps running.
The kubelet isn’t watching for its own existence, so if a node is deleted the kubelet doesn’t terminate itself.

> All the pod objects get deleted a minute later, from a garbage collection process because the pods’ nodes are gone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the pod objects get deleted by a garbage collection process later because the pods’ nodes are gone.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## What can cause deprovisioning to fail?

There are a few cases where requesting to deprovision a Karpenter node will fail. These include Pod Disruption Budgets and pods that have the `do-not-evict` annotation set.

### Disruption budgets

Karpenter respects Pod Disruption Budgets (PDBs) when provisioning nodes and can prevent a node from being deprovisioned to maintain those disruption budgets.
Kubernetes PDBs let you specify how much of a Deployment, ReplicationController, ReplicaSet, or StatefulSet must be protected from disruptions when pod eviction requests are made. 

> PDBs can be used to strike a balance by protecting the application's availability while still allowing a cluster operator to manage the cluster.

Reviewer 2: This should follow in line with this, right? https://github.com/aws/karpenter/pull/1137 
```suggestion
PDBs can be used to strike a balance by protecting the application's availability while still allowing a cluster admin to manage the cluster.
```

Here is an example where the pods matching the label `myapp` will block node termination if evicting the pod would reduce the number of available pods below 4.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: nit: this should say yaml

apiVersion: policy/v1
kind: PodDisruptionBudget
metadata:
  name: myapp-pdb
spec:
  minAvailable: 4
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: myapp
```

You can set `minAvailable` or `maxUnavailable` as integers or as a percentage.
Review what [disruptions are](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/disruptions/), and [how to configure them](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/configure-pdb/).

### Pod set to do-not-evict

Karpenter will not drain a node if a pod exists with the annotation `karpenter.sh/do-not-evict`.

> The node will be cordoned to prevent additional work from scheduling.

Reviewer 2: It will also not drain any pods until the `do-not-evict` pod is removed.
https://github.com/aws/karpenter/blob/main/pkg/controllers/termination/terminate.go#L68-L81 shows that if there is a pod that has a `do-not-evict` annotation, the draining mechanism will not evict any pods.

Additionally, it might be worth noting that if a `do-not-evict` pod somehow gets scheduled to a node mid-draining, the remainder of pods will still evict, but that pod will block termination until it is removed. This is a small edge case, so it might not be worth noting.
